# Introduction

Athletes look to science to increase their performance. With the tremendous scientific advancements human-kind achieved, it's easy to overlook the more simplistic tools to achieve similar solutions.
The owner of the dataset, Hikmet Gumus, captured the accelerations generated by four experienced handball players performing overarm throwings by attaching an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) to the players' dominant hand's wrist. The device Hikmet Gumus attached is relatively inexpensive, thus, more easily attainable. Suppose we can predict the ball's velocity using simple measurements; if we examine the data thoroughly, we could likely deduce how to increase the athletes' performance, and to decrease the risk of injury.

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Data Processing](#data-processing)
    - [Dataset Overview](#dataset-overview)
    - [Data Integrity](#data-integrity)

## Goals

1. Experience working with sensory data.
2. Predict the balls' velocity using wrist acceleration measurements captured by the IMU.

## Data Processing

To my understanding, IMU's do not typically return acceleration in meters by seconds squared (acceleration) or in radians (angular velocity); thus, this dataset is great for introductory reasons. On the other hand, I was hoping the owner had shared the unconverted raw data and the IMU's manual to convert the readings by myself to the correct units.
Since the owner already transformed the raw data, I assume they also calibrated the devices and that the readings are accurate.

### Dataset Overview

The owner published 106 files containing information.

The file 'Speed-Filenames.csv' contains 105 rows and two columns; radar gun speed and the file name with the IMU measurements.

The other 105 files contain varying amounts of rows depending on how long it took the athlete to complete the throw and seven columns; time, acceleration on x, y, z axes, and angular velocity on the x, y, z axes.

### Processing Steps

* Rename columns
* Focus on acceleration and ignore the angular velocity (for now)
* Intergrate acceleration to calculate the velocities
* Smoothen the values to help reduce noise
* Calculate the vector magnitude (acceleration and velocity)
* Focusing on readings near the acceleration peak
* Scale the data
* Create a training and testing datasets
    * Each row would contain the acceleration magnitudes for a single throw (file)
    * Append the radar gun reading to the observations
    * Optional: Add wrist velocities

